README.md, before:

# Celestia rollup for Tendermint-based Starknet sequencer 

Sequencer for Starknet based in Tendermint and [starknet-in-rust](https://github.com/lambdaclass/starknet_in_rust).

## Option 1: Running the rollup with a rollkit

### Data availability (DA) layer

On a terminal, run Celestia consensus and DA bridge nodes.

```sh
make celestia
```

### Rollkit

Install `Tendermint` and initialize it. This will initialize the required files that rollkit will use when running:

```sh
make tendermint_install
bin/tendermint init
```

Notice you can also eventually use Tendermint for running it as a consensus mechanism alongside the sequencer ABCI (see Option 3).

Build and run Rollkit.

```sh
make rollkit_celestia
```

Note that the above code requires `md5sum` binary to be avaliable in order to generate a random namespace ID.

### Sequencer (app layer)

```sh
make abci
```

At this point you have a DA layer, the application layer (sequencer ABCI) and rollkit running as a replacement for Tendermint. You can send transactions to rollkit and see them go to the ABCI and the DA layer.

## Option 2: Running the rollup for Bitcoin

Note: This requires `bitcoin-cli` and `bitcoind` to be installed. See [the original guide](https://rollkit.dev/docs/tutorials/bitcoin/) for more information.
### DA Layer

What we need to do to run this is generate a wallet and run the daemon. For this, run

```sh
make bitcoin
```

This runs `./bitcoin/start-daemon.sh` and `./bitcoin/run.sh`. Bitcoin acts as the DA layer.

### Sequencer (app layer)

On another terminal, run the ABCI.

```sh
make abci
```

### Rollkit

If Tendermint is not installed, install and initialize it. This will initialize the required files that rollkit will use when running:

```sh
make tendermint_install
bin/tendermint init
```

Notice you can also eventually use Tendermint for running it as a consensus mechanism alongside the sequencer ABCI (see following section).

Build and run Rollkit with Bitcoin DA layer.

```sh
# requires md5sum 
make rollkit_bitcoin
```

### Sequencer (app layer)

```sh
make abci
```

At this point you have a DA layer, the application layer (sequencer ABCI) and rollkit running as a replacement for Tendermint.


## Option 3: Running ABCI + Tendermint 

You can also alternatively opt to run the sequencer ABCI with Tendermint by just running those two binaries.

Run Tendermint Core node on a terminal:

```bash
make node
```

Run the ABCI sequencer application:

```bash
make abci
```
In order to reset Tendermint's state before rerunning it, make sure you run `make reset`

### Sending a transaction

To send executions to the sequencer you need to have a compiled Cairo program (*.json files in the repo). Then you can send them like so:

```bash
cargo run --release programs/fibonacci.json main
```

### Benchmark

You can run a benchmark with

```bash
cd sequencer
cargo run --release --bin bench -- --nodes "{list-of-nodes}" --threads 4 --transactions-per-thread 1000
```

Where `list-of-nodes` is a list of addresses that are part of the Tendermint network (in the form of `ipaddr:socket`).
The benchmark runs `fibonacci.json` (`fib(500)`), where requests are sent with a round-robin fashion to the list of nodes, through the number of threads you specify, with the amount of transactions per thread you desire.

#### Example run

```bash
> cargo run --release --bin bench -- --nodes "127.0.0.1:26157 127.0.0.1:26057"

Time it took for all transactions to be delivered: 1308 ms
```

Note that this is the time for all transactions to return (ie; validation that they have entered the mempool), but no assumptions can be made in terms of transaction finality.

### Benchmarking with Tendermint Load Testing Framework

There is an alternate way to benchmark the app: using [tm-load-test](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test). In order to do that there is a load_test command written in go in `/bench` directory. This needs Go v1.12 at least to be built.

To build it:

```bash
cd bench
go build -o ./build/load_test ./cmd/load_test/main.go
```

and once built move back to root directory and use 

```bash
./bench/build/load_test -c 10 -T 10 -r 1000 -s 250 --broadcast-tx-method async --endpoints ws://localhost:26657/websocket --stats-output result.csv
```

to run it against a local tendermint+abci node.

`-c` is the amount of connectios per endpoint

`-T` is the amount of seconds to run the test

`-r` is the rate of tx per second to send

`-s` is the maximum size of a transaction to be sent.

Run 
```bash
./bench/build/load_test -h
```
to get further information.

In result.csv there will be a summary of the operation. eg:
```bash
> cat result.csv
Parameter,Value,Units
total_time,10.875,seconds
total_txs,55249,count
total_bytes,1242747923,bytes
avg_tx_rate,5080.169436,transactions per second
avg_data_rate,114271208.808144,bytes per second
```

To run it against a cluster, several nodes can be provided in `--endpoints` parameter. eg:
```bash
./bench/build/load_test -c 5 -T 10 -r 1000 -s 250 --broadcast-tx-method async --endpoints ws://5.9.57.45:26657/websocket,ws://5.9.57.44:26657/websocket,ws://5.9.57.89:26657/websocket --stats-output result.csv
```

Check [tm-load-test](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test) and [Tendermint Load Testing Framework](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test/tree/main/pkg/loadtest) and for more information.

## Reference links
* [Starknet sequencer](https://www.starknet.io/de/posts/engineering/starknets-new-sequencer#:~:text=What%20does%20the%20sequencer%20do%3F)
* [Papyrus Starknet full node](https://medium.com/starkware/papyrus-an-open-source-starknet-full-node-396f7cd90202)
* [Blockifier](https://github.com/starkware-libs/blockifier)
* [tendermint-rs](https://github.com/informalsystems/tendermint-rs)
* [ABCI overview](https://docs.tendermint.com/v0.34/introduction/what-is-tendermint.html#abci-overview)
* [ABCI v0.34 reference](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/spec/abci/abci.md)
* [About why app hash is needed](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/1179). Also [this](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/spec/abci/apps.md#query-proofs).
* [About Tendermint 0.34's future](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/9972)
### Starknet
* [Starknet State](https://docs.starknet.io/documentation/architecture_and_concepts/State/starknet-state/)
* [Starknet architecture](https://david-barreto.com/starknets-architecture-review/)
* [Starknet transaction lifecylce](https://docs.starknet.io/documentation/architecture_and_concepts/Blocks/transaction-life-cycle/)

Commit message:

Added CometBFT descriptions in README

README.md, after:

# Celestia rollup for Tendermint-based Starknet sequencer 

Sequencer for Starknet based in Tendermint and [starknet-in-rust](https://github.com/lambdaclass/starknet_in_rust).

## Option 1: Running the rollup with a rollkit

### Data availability (DA) layer

On a terminal, run Celestia consensus and DA bridge nodes.

```sh
make celestia
```

### Rollkit

Install `Tendermint` and initialize it. This will initialize the required files that rollkit will use when running:

```sh
make consensus_install
bin/tendermint init
```

Notice you can also eventually use Tendermint for running it as a consensus mechanism alongside the sequencer ABCI (see Option 3).

Build and run Rollkit.

```sh
make rollkit_celestia
```

Note that the above code requires `md5sum` binary to be avaliable in order to generate a random namespace ID.

### Sequencer (app layer)

```sh
make abci
```

At this point you have a DA layer, the application layer (sequencer ABCI) and rollkit running as a replacement for Tendermint. You can send transactions to rollkit and see them go to the ABCI and the DA layer.

## Option 2: Running the rollup for Bitcoin

Note: This requires `bitcoin-cli` and `bitcoind` to be installed. See [the original guide](https://rollkit.dev/docs/tutorials/bitcoin/) for more information.
### DA Layer

What we need to do to run this is generate a wallet and run the daemon. For this, run

```sh
make bitcoin
```

This runs `./bitcoin/start-daemon.sh` and `./bitcoin/run.sh`. Bitcoin acts as the DA layer.

### Sequencer (app layer)

On another terminal, run the ABCI.

```sh
make abci
```

### Rollkit

If Tendermint is not installed, install and initialize it. This will initialize the required files that rollkit will use when running:

```sh
make consensus_install
bin/tendermint init
```

Notice you can also eventually use Tendermint for running it as a consensus mechanism alongside the sequencer ABCI (see following section).

Build and run Rollkit with Bitcoin DA layer.

```sh
# requires md5sum 
make rollkit_bitcoin
```

### Sequencer (app layer)

```sh
make abci
```

At this point you have a DA layer, the application layer (sequencer ABCI) and rollkit running as a replacement for Tendermint.


## Option 3: Running ABCI + Tendermint 

You can also alternatively opt to run the sequencer ABCI with Tendermint by just running those two binaries.

Run Tendermint Core node on a terminal:

```bash
make node
```

Run the ABCI sequencer application:

```bash
make abci
```
In order to reset Tendermint's state before rerunning it, make sure you run `make reset`

### Sending a transaction

To send executions to the sequencer you need to have a compiled Cairo program (*.json files in the repo). Then you can send them like so:

```bash
cargo run --release programs/fibonacci.json main
```

### Running [CometBFT](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft) instead of Tendermint

Current code can be run with both Tendermint and CometBFT (up to version 0.34.27). In order to use CometBFT the make command should include the `CONSENSUS` variable:

```bash
make node CONSENSUS=cometbft
```

This will run CometBFT instead of Tendermint (and also will install and configure it if not present).

Also

```bash
make consensus_intall CONSENSUS=cometbft
```
will run the CometBFT installation script

### Benchmark

You can run a benchmark with

```bash
cd sequencer
cargo run --release --bin bench -- --nodes "{list-of-nodes}" --threads 4 --transactions-per-thread 1000
```

Where `list-of-nodes` is a list of addresses that are part of the Tendermint network (in the form of `ipaddr:socket`).
The benchmark runs `fibonacci.json` (`fib(500)`), where requests are sent with a round-robin fashion to the list of nodes, through the number of threads you specify, with the amount of transactions per thread you desire.

#### Example run

```bash
> cargo run --release --bin bench -- --nodes "127.0.0.1:26157 127.0.0.1:26057"

Time it took for all transactions to be delivered: 1308 ms
```

Note that this is the time for all transactions to return (ie; validation that they have entered the mempool), but no assumptions can be made in terms of transaction finality.

### Benchmarking with Tendermint Load Testing Framework

There is an alternate way to benchmark the app: using [tm-load-test](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test). In order to do that there is a load_test command written in go in `/bench` directory. This needs Go v1.12 at least to be built.

To build it:

```bash
cd bench
go build -o ./build/load_test ./cmd/load_test/main.go
```

and once built move back to root directory and use 

```bash
./bench/build/load_test -c 10 -T 10 -r 1000 -s 250 --broadcast-tx-method async --endpoints ws://localhost:26657/websocket --stats-output result.csv
```

to run it against a local tendermint+abci node.

`-c` is the amount of connectios per endpoint

`-T` is the amount of seconds to run the test

`-r` is the rate of tx per second to send

`-s` is the maximum size of a transaction to be sent.

Run 
```bash
./bench/build/load_test -h
```
to get further information.

In result.csv there will be a summary of the operation. eg:
```bash
> cat result.csv
Parameter,Value,Units
total_time,10.875,seconds
total_txs,55249,count
total_bytes,1242747923,bytes
avg_tx_rate,5080.169436,transactions per second
avg_data_rate,114271208.808144,bytes per second
```

To run it against a cluster, several nodes can be provided in `--endpoints` parameter. eg:
```bash
./bench/build/load_test -c 5 -T 10 -r 1000 -s 250 --broadcast-tx-method async --endpoints ws://5.9.57.45:26657/websocket,ws://5.9.57.44:26657/websocket,ws://5.9.57.89:26657/websocket --stats-output result.csv
```

Check [tm-load-test](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test) and [Tendermint Load Testing Framework](https://github.com/informalsystems/tm-load-test/tree/main/pkg/loadtest) and for more information.

## Reference links
* [Starknet sequencer](https://www.starknet.io/de/posts/engineering/starknets-new-sequencer#:~:text=What%20does%20the%20sequencer%20do%3F)
* [Papyrus Starknet full node](https://medium.com/starkware/papyrus-an-open-source-starknet-full-node-396f7cd90202)
* [Blockifier](https://github.com/starkware-libs/blockifier)
* [tendermint-rs](https://github.com/informalsystems/tendermint-rs)
* [ABCI overview](https://docs.tendermint.com/v0.34/introduction/what-is-tendermint.html#abci-overview)
* [ABCI v0.34 reference](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/spec/abci/abci.md)
* [CometBFT](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft)
* [About why app hash is needed](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/1179). Also [this](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/v0.34.x/spec/abci/apps.md#query-proofs).
* [About Tendermint 0.34's future](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/9972)
### Starknet
* [Starknet State](https://docs.starknet.io/documentation/architecture_and_concepts/State/starknet-state/)
* [Starknet architecture](https://david-barreto.com/starknets-architecture-review/)
* [Starknet transaction lifecylce](https://docs.starknet.io/documentation/architecture_and_concepts/Blocks/transaction-life-cycle/)
